# A Short History of the Austrian School of Economics

*Published: 2021-09-17*

The Austrian school’s founding is described (usually) by the writing of the book, the Principles of Economics by Carl Menger. Menger was born in Galicia, to a wealthy family. He worked as a journalist before becoming an Economist, and seeing the contradictions in ideas of the Economists at the time, he decided to put his own arguments forward instead. Menger’s arguments against theories of objective value, such as the ‘prices are derived from the cost of producing it’ or the ‘things should be valued by the amount of effort people put into them’. Both are absolutely incorrect claims on value because things are valued subjectively to the person owning them, or using them. “One man’s trash is another’s treasure.” One person may highly value an insulin shot as they are diabetic but someone who isn’t diabetic may not value an insulin shot for their own use, although they may take it and save it to trade in the future for something they do value.

Talking about trade, Menger proved the existence of money different from Adam Smith, he argued that money came about to make intermediary trades easier. Ron wants a leather bag and he has a crate of apples to trade. He probably won’t find the leather bag in his first trade as it may be unlikely the leather bag maker wants apples (in this example we can suppose so), so now Ron has to go around town trading with people to find an item that the bag maker wants. This is a massive hassle. This whole process can be simplified through a currency, which would be the ultimate and only intermediary. You would just need something that is widely accepted, and things such as shells, rocks, cattle, and such were very early forms of currency. As society advanced, these became precious metals. Through this explanation of the creation of money, Menger was able to show that money came into existence without a state.

Before we get onto the main Austrian economists in the 20th century, we must talk a bit about Bawerk. He was one of the biggest fans of Menger. He is notable especially for the high position he held as an Austrian economist but also for his extensive refutation of Marxist theory.

Now, we come to the superstar of the Austrian school and our herald. Mises, an absolute genius. His contributions to the Austrian school are so extensive, we cannot talk about all or even most of them, just his biggest contributions. I consider his greatest contribution to be to Austrian praxeology, which he significantly developed with his brilliant book “Human Action”. He was also famous for his arguments against socialism, which he also wrote a book on in 1922 called ‘socialism’.

He was born in Austria as a Jew, and historically, his family had been massive supporters of the Germanization of Austria, and as a result Mises was taught to be fluent in German, which explains some of his writings which are in that language. Mises’ grandfather was a big supporter of the Germanization due to German culture being a bastion of liberty and prosperity, but since then to 1940s, that changed, and Mises had to flee Austria at the threat of the German advance.

Mises took up a position as a visiting professor at NYU, but the university couldn’t bother to fund his work, and his work was funded by fellow libertarians and admirers.

His works are quite in depth and slightly difficult to explain, and the amount of time it would take to explain them would go out of scope for this article. It is imperative to reiterate his impact on Austrian economics, he completely changed the field and put it miles ahead of anything else, but also solidified austrian ethics and law through praxeology, which I consider to be his greatest contribution to the school.

One of the students of Mises, and by far the most popular Austrian economist is Hayek. Hayek, when he fled Austria, came to London, and spent most of his time being the prime opponent of John Maynard Keynes. I will elaborate on the work of Keynes and why it’s so wonderfully wrong in another article. Hayek was able to predict the Great Depression by tracking variances in the interest rates and money supply. Hayek is also widely popular for his book, the Road to Serfdom, which discusses the dangers of tyranny and how central planning of any degree is a pipeline to that.

Rothbard, a student of Mises, was the leading academic in the Austrian school after the foundations that Mises and Hayek had laid. He had written over 20 books on Austrian theory and anarcho-capitalism and was a very firm advocate of the latter. His contributions are very numerous, but in general, he is quite popular for his criticism of the state, stating it is an “organization of robbery systematized and writ large.” Rothbard started out as a Republican, being a member of the New York Young Republican Club, but in the 1940’s he was exposed to many libertarian works which he was heavily influenced by and became an advocate and missionary of. He was especially influenced by “Human action” by Mises.

Rothbard’s premier book was “Man, Economy and State” which to this date is considered as one of the best reads in Austrian and Anarcho-Capitalist groups. Like Mises, Rothbard was a strict believer in Praxeology, a set of absolute economic laws like those algebraic or geometric in the field of Mathematics. He hated Adam Smith, calling him a plagiarist, and Keynes, calling him a political opportunist. He was a big critique of Egalitarianism too, writing an essay named “Egalitarianism as a revolt against human nature” and taking up many talks discussing the flaws, issues and hypocrisy in the ideology. He opposed most egalitarian movements including women’s suffrage and the American Civil Rights Movement.

Now to the last notable Austrian economist, and by far my personal favourite. Hans Herman Hoppe. A absolute genius, not only bringing in his own ideology of Hoppeanism to Anarcho-Capitalism but also greatly adding to Austrian academics through ideas such as argumentation ethics, essentially proving self ownership by saying that it is a presupposition to any argument, and anyone arguing against self ownership is being logically contradictory as they have already proven they own themselves.

His variant of Anarcho-Capitalism is called Hoppeanism, which I will brief in this and the next paragraph. Hoppeanism is a system of private communities that behave under anarcho-capitalist law. The way it works is, there is a private city, and anyone who wants to live there voluntarily agrees to be subject to it’s laws. Usually, this city is managed by a corporation, which the residents are part or full owners of. Anyone outside this city can behave any way they want as long as they are following the NAP, but inside any rule that the owners of the community agree to will be enforced. This is a very nice solution to a form of social protectionism, only allowing certain people into a community, usually people you like.

Not only are these communities truly free, as being a member is completely voluntary, but they are also very orderly, even more than normal anarcho-capitalist cities as they have the benefit of collectivized controls and provisions. For example, a group of specialists may want to live independent of all other specialists, in their own specialized city and get all necessary resources through the free market. With hoppeanism, they can easily achieve this by barring those who do not meet their requirements or are not liked by them to join. Those who tend to be on the conservative side, or on the isolationist side tend to love this idea and this notion has brought many traditionally authoritarian right-wingers to libertarianism.

Hoppe is a strong advocate for the opposition of socialism, stating that “There can be no socialism without a state, and as long as there is a state there is socialism. The state, then, is the very institution that puts socialism into action; and as socialism rests on aggressive violence directed against innocent victims, aggressive violence is the nature of any state.” He also believes in mono-ethnic communities and is a relative traditionalist. This has given much negative attention to him in the media, but this does not do any discredit to his brilliant ideas.

The history of Austrian economics and anarcho-capitalism is as long as the history of economics itself. There have been many great thinkers until now, and there will be many many more to come.

Thank you for reading.

---
For further reading and listening, I recommend, again, Anglo Libertarian’s brief summary on the history of the profession and Jorg Guido Hulsmann’s lecture about it which goes into a good level of depth. That lecture is the first in a 11 part series introducing you to the Austrian School of Economics which I highly recommend for anyone interested in the field as you are unlikely to find all the important points and topics covered in one set at a comfortable level of depth by credible professors anywhere else. Plus points for being in audio format, or at least you can get it in audio format as that allows you to listen to it while doing other stuff, which is recommended because each lecture is about 30 to 60 minutes.

To check out the works of more modern Austrians, you can look at talks at the Mises institute that was founded by Mises and Rothbard. Most are associated with the Mises institute.
Wikipedia does a good job outlining the works of the economists but I highly recommend you read their modern interpretations or their original works/essays in order to get a concrete understanding of their method of thinking and why they argued what they argued for.