# Rittenhouse: A Sign of Relief for Freedom

*Published: 2021-12-13*

The Kyle Rittenhouse court case has become a national sensation in the United States of America. It has received extensive coverage by multiple news sites and has had a good deal of commentary from the political class of the country. Rittenhouse was acquitted of all charges which included two counts of homicide and a count of attempted homicide.

The case came into the public eye after the shooting that took place in Kenosha, Wisconsin where Rittenhouse shot and killed two men while wounding the other, using an AR-15 style rifle. As per the verdict of the jury, this was an act of self-defense, and this stance makes sense – he was being followed by two grown men as a minor, one who fired a shot in the air. On the second encounter, one man hit him with a skateboard and tried to grab his rifle, which ended up in him being fatally shot – and one more lunged at him and tried to procure his firearm, which ended up in him being shot in the right arm.

There is a grand political divide in the case, on one side we have the gun rights activists, who believe this verdict was a much-needed reminder for the American public that the judicial system can and will enforce gun rights, while the gun control activists see this as a failure of the judicial system – another ‘mass’ shooting but in this case, the terrorist was acquitted of the crime he committed.

This has been used as a tool by the political mainstream to pander to their supporters, the democrats showing the horrors of ‘right-wing gun violence’ and how the judicial system is ‘filled with biases and therefore a failure’ while the republicans pander that Rittenhouse is an ‘American hero’ and that this was ‘proof that the judicial system is still faithful to the constitution.’ Two fallacies the democrats repeatedly commit – one is labeling Rittenhouse a white (European descent) supremacist and the second is convicting him of a crime when he is Latino (Latin American descent) and hasn’t broken any laws and the legal process has not found him guilty either. A fallacy that the republicans hold is that Rittenhouse is an American hero, which he isn’t – simply a person defending his life.

As a libertarian, I see this case as somewhat irrelevant, but a definite reminder that the judicial system has got the back of those who enforce their second amendment rights. One big issue with gun rights, an issue which I hold a pro-gun stance on, is that even though activists have fought tooth and nail for ownership, in the end, it has been relatively fruitless as when it came to defending ourselves, the law always held us back – essentially limiting our ability to enforce the right to protect ourselves. What’s the point of owning a gun for self-defense when the courts won’t let you use it to protect yourself?

Although this is a good example of gun rights being enforced, it is still scary that you need to rely on a government-funded service that has no guarantee of giving you a quality or even a correct trial. Laws exist between entities, and a case of violation of those laws is the concern of those two parties alone. Yes, we have an entity that holds a monopoly on coercion and therefore dictates a set of common laws, even within those common laws this should be a matter resolved by those who are directly involved in it, and they should have the right to choose their form of mediation.

Asking for a private law system in the current state of the country is very, very far-fetched, but it can be a goal to work towards. First would be starting by cutting down the number of common laws that exist in the first place, and then we would move on to increasing freedom of choice for people to select a court of their choosing, although this can easily devolve into a flawed system considering propositions for legal licensing and limiting market entry through legal means, which would conclude into a worse form of the current system, a private monopoly on justice. Not surprisingly, this is a natural conclusion for most regulated industries too.

The court of law isn’t a democracy – it is autocratic. The public should and do have no say, and the threatening of riots and the stalking of the judiciary in order to expose their identities is a representation of how the general public feels like they should have a say in the court of law, it is very good that they don’t. The trial was a reminder that the public system still sometimes works and a definite win for gun rights. It is not right that we are forced to follow unnecessary common laws, nor it is fair that we are forced to attain justice through a publicly funded service with no history of having stellar quality. A sigh of relief for freedom, but not a step forward.